---
sidebar_position: 6
---

# Optimizers (formerly Teleprompters)

A **DSPy optimizer** is an algorithm that can tune the parameters of a DSPy program (i.e., the prompts and/or the LM weights) to maximize the metrics you specify, like accuracy.

There are many built-in optimizers in DSPy, which apply vastly different strategies. A typical DSPy optimizer takes three things:

- Your **DSPy program**. This may be a single module (e.g., `dspy.Predict`) or a complex multi-module program.

- Your **metric**. This is a function that evaluates the output of your program, and assigns it a score (higher is better).

- A few **training inputs**. This may be very small (i.e., only 5 or 10 examples) and incomplete (only inputs to your program, without any labels).

If you happen to have a lot of data, DSPy can leverage that. But you can start small and get strong results.

**Note:** Formerly called **DSPy Teleprompters**. We are making an official name update, which will be reflected throughout the library and documentation.


## **What** does a DSPy Optimizer tune? **How** does it tune them?

Traditional deep neural networks (DNNs) can be optimized with gradient descent, given a loss function and some training data.

DSPy programs consist of multiple calls to LMs, stacked together as [DSPy modules]. Each DSPy module has internal parameters of three kinds: (1) the LM weights, (2) the instructions, and (3) demonstrations of the input/output behavior.

Given a metric, DSPy can optimize all of these three with multi-stage optimization algorithms. These can combine gradient descent (for LM weights) and discrete LM-driven optimization, i.e. for crafting/updating instructions and for creating/validating demonstrations. DSPy Demonstrations are like few-shot examples, but they're far more powerful. They can be created from scratch, given your program, and their creation and selection can be optimized in many effective ways.

In many cases, we found that compiling leads to better prompts than human writing. Not because DSPy optimizers are more creative than humans, but simply because they can try more things, much more systematically, and tune the metrics directly.


## What DSPy Optimizers are currently available?

<!-- The following diagram was generated by: -->
<!-- 1. Running symilar on the teleprompter module to extract the python hierarchy as a Graphviz dot file -->
<!-- 2. Hand-editing the resulting dot file to remove classes that are not teleprompters/optimizers (e.g., classes for data structures manipulated by optimizers). -->
<!-- 3. Using dot to compile the `.dot` file into a PNG -->
<!-- Robert Goldman [2024/05/11:rpg] -->

[Subclasses of Teleprompter](figures/teleprompter-classes.png)

All of these can be accessed via `from dspy.teleprompt import *`.

### Automatic Few-Shot Learning

These optimizers extend the signature by automatically generating and including **optimized** examples within the prompt sent to the model, implementing few-shot learning.

1. **`LabeledFewShot`**: Simply constructs few-shot examples (demos) from provided labeled input and output data points.  Requires `k` (number of examples for the prompt) and `trainset` to randomly select `k` examples from.

2. **`BootstrapFewShot`**: Uses a `teacher` module (which defaults to your program) to generate complete demonstrations for every stage of your program, along with labeled examples in `trainset`. Parameters include `max_labeled_demos` (the number of demonstrations randomly selected from the `trainset`) and `max_bootstrapped_demos` (the number of additional examples generated by the `teacher`). The bootstrapping process employs the metric to validate demonstrations, including only those that pass the metric in the "compiled" prompt. Advanced: Supports using a `teacher` program that is a *different* DSPy program that has compatible structure, for harder tasks.

3. [**`BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch`**](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/deep-dive/optimizers/bootstrap-fewshot): Applies `BootstrapFewShot` several times with random search over generated demonstrations, and selects the best program over the optimization. Parameters mirror those of `BootstrapFewShot`, with the addition of `num_candidate_programs`, which specifies the number of random programs evaluated over the optimization, including candidates of the uncompiled program, `LabeledFewShot` optimized program, `BootstrapFewShot` compiled program with unshuffled examples and `num_candidate_programs` of `BootstrapFewShot` compiled programs with randomized example sets.

4. **`KNNFewShot`**. Uses k-Nearest Neighbors algorithm to find the nearest training example demonstrations for a given input example. These nearest neighbor demonstrations are then used as the trainset for the BootstrapFewShot optimization process. See [this notebook](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/main/examples/knn.ipynb) for an example.


### Automatic Instruction Optimization

These optimizers produce optimal instructions for the prompt and, in the case of MIPROv2 can also optimize the set of few-shot demonstrations.

5. [**`COPRO`**](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/deep-dive/optimizers/copro): Generates and refines new instructions for each step, and optimizes them with coordinate ascent (hill-climbing using the metric function and the `trainset`). Parameters include `depth` which is the number of iterations of prompt improvement the optimizer runs over.

6. [**`MIPROv2`**](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/deep-dive/optimizers/miprov2): Generates instructions *and* few-shot examples in each step. The instruction generation is data-aware and demonstration-aware. Uses Bayesian Optimization to effectively search over the space of generation instructions/demonstrations across your modules.


### Automatic Finetuning

This optimizer is used to fine-tune the underlying LLM(s).

7. **`BootstrapFinetune`**: Distills a prompt-based DSPy program into weight updates (for smaller LMs). The output is a DSPy program that has the same steps, but where each step is conducted by a finetuned model instead of a prompted LM.


### Program Transformations

8. **`Ensemble`**: Ensembles a set of DSPy programs and either uses the full set or randomly samples a subset into a single program.


## Which optimizer should I use?

Ultimately, finding the ‘right’ optimizer to use & the best configuration for your task will require experimentation. Success in DSPy is still an iterative process - getting the best performance on your task will require you to explore and iterate.  

That being said, here's the general guidance on getting started:
* If you have **very few examples** (around 10), start with `BootstrapFewShot`.
* If you have **more data** (50 examples or more), try  `BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch`.
* If you prefer to do **instruction optimization only** (i.e. you want to keep your prompt 0-shot), use `MIPROv2` [configured for 0-shot optimization to optimize](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/deep-dive/optimizers/miprov2#optimizing-instructions-only-with-miprov2-0-shot). 
* If you’re willing to use more inference calls to perform **longer optimization runs** (e.g. 40 trials or more), and have enough data (e.g. 200 examples or more to prevent overfitting) then try `MIPROv2`. 
* If you have been able to use one of these with a large LM (e.g., 7B parameters or above) and need a very **efficient program**, finetune a small LM for your task with `BootstrapFinetune`.

## How do I use an optimizer?

They all share this general interface, with some differences in the keyword arguments (hyperparameters). Detailed documentation for key optimizers can be found [here](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/deep-dive/optimizers/), and a full list can be found [here](https://dspy-docs.vercel.app/docs/cheatsheet).

Let's see this with the most common one, `BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch`.

```python
from dspy.teleprompt import BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch

# Set up the optimizer: we want to "bootstrap" (i.e., self-generate) 8-shot examples of your program's steps.
# The optimizer will repeat this 10 times (plus some initial attempts) before selecting its best attempt on the devset.
config = dict(max_bootstrapped_demos=4, max_labeled_demos=4, num_candidate_programs=10, num_threads=4)

teleprompter = BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch(metric=YOUR_METRIC_HERE, **config)
optimized_program = teleprompter.compile(YOUR_PROGRAM_HERE, trainset=YOUR_TRAINSET_HERE)
```

## Saving and loading optimizer output

After running a program through an optimizer, it's useful to also save it. At a later point, a program can be loaded from a file and used for inference. For this, the `load` and `save` methods can be used.

### Saving a program

```python
optimized_program.save(YOUR_SAVE_PATH)
```

The resulting file is in plain-text JSON format. It contains all the parameters and steps in the source program. You can always read it and see what the optimizer generated.

You can add `save_verbose` to additionally save the list of fields with the keys, `name`, `field_type`, `description`, and `prefix` with: `optimized_program.save(YOUR_SAVE_PATH, save_field_meta=True).

### Loading a program

To load a program from a file, you can instantiate an object from that class and then call the load method on it.

```python
loaded_program = YOUR_PROGRAM_CLASS()
loaded_program.load(path=YOUR_SAVE_PATH)
```
